Paper (#195)
common-workflow-lab/wdl-cwl-translator: paper/paper.md

the workflows definitions.

``wdl2cwl`` is a Python package for converting workflow written in WDL to workflows in CWL.
The ``wdl2cwl`` package uses the ``miniwdl`` package [@miniwdl], an open source, Python package, 
developer toolkit and local runner for running WDL files. The ``wdl2cwl`` package was
designed to provide a class-based and developer-friendly interface for extracting 
the various sections of a WDL file, dynamically create the various objects
needed to create a valid CWL file ( this is done using the ``cwl-utils`` package [@cwl_utils], 
an open source, Python package for parsing CWL files) and performing error checking 
for valid imports, input declarations, expressions and other useful operations on CWL files.

``wdl2cwl`` was designed for users familiar with CWL or WDL, and can be used in different domains such as data analytics, bioinformatics, GIS, and more. Users that have CWL workflows, for instance, will not have to worry
about installing the dependencies for running a WDL workflow. It also eases the learning curve when one knows CWL and needs to use WDL and vice-versa.

# Acknowledgements

> We acknowledge the work by the developers of miniwdl, CWL and WDL.

Reviewer: Sarah (Curii) suggested we acknowledge CZI & Outreachy too if possible. I think maybe here we could have something like (copying the text suggested by Sarah):

“The Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI) has supporitng this work through their [EOSS - Diversity & Inclusion](https://cziscience.medium.com/advancing-diversity-and-inclusion-in-scientific-open-source-eaabe6a5488b) grant. Additionally, we are grateful to Outreachy and their internship program for organizing and providing support for the three-month internship focused on this work”

Reviewer 2: I am not terribly picking about wording :)

Reviewer 2: I think we probably should acknowledge 2 internships though - I messed up when writing this but I think both @dinithiW and @Th3nn3ss worked on this through Outreachy.

CWL on the other hand, is a way to describe command line tools and connect 
them together to create workflows. Because CWL is a specification and not a 
specific piece of software, tools and workflows described using CWL are portable across
a variety of platforms that support the CWL standard [@cwl].

Groups using WDL or CWL can find it difficult to learn the other workflow definition
language if they need to run their workflows in other platforms. It becomes even harder 
when the workflows contain domain specific knowledge mixed with the definitions, and 
when analysts and scientists need to consider future collaboration of other groups on 
the workflows definitions.

``wdl2cwl`` is a Python package for converting workflow written in WDL to workflows in CWL.
The ``wdl2cwl`` package uses the ``miniwdl`` package [@miniwdl], an open source, Python package, 
developer toolkit and local runner for running WDL files. The ``wdl2cwl`` package was
designed to provide a class-based and developer-friendly interface for extracting 
the various sections of a WDL file, dynamically create the various objects

> needed to create a valid CWL file ( this is done using the ``cwl-utils`` package [@cwl_utils], 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
needed to create a valid CWL file (this is done using the ``cwl-utils`` package [@cwl_utils], 
```

an open source, Python package for parsing CWL files) and performing error checking 
for valid imports, input declarations, expressions and other useful operations on CWL files.

> ``wdl2cwl`` was designed to be used by both CWL/WDL professionals and researchers, as well
> as students of bioinformatics and data analytics. It can help CWL analysts to avoid
> platform dependency issues (like trying to reproduce a WDL workflow on a platform that 
> only allows CWL). It can help analysts by eliminating the difficulty of learning a new
> workflow language before they an use a WDL worflow. It can be used to create a more 
> widely available workflow that can be used by analysts of either languages.

Reviewer: This paragraph could be changed a little I think. Maybe:

```suggestion
``wdl2cwl`` was designed for users familiar with CWL or WDL, and can be used in different domains such as data analytics, bioinformatics, GIS, and more. Users that have CWL workflows, for instance, will not have to worry
about installing the dependencies for running a WDL workflow. It also eases the learning curve when one knows CWL and needs to use WDL and vice-versa.
```

---
title: 'wdl2cwl: A Python tool for converting WDL workflow files to CWL workflows'
tags:
  - Python
  - workflow
  - workflow description language
  - common workflow language
  - Language
authors:
  - name: Dinithi Wickramaratne
  - name: Dennis Chukwunta
  - name: Michael R. Crusoe
    orcid: 0000-0002-2961-9670
  - name: Bruno P. Kinoshita
    orcid: 0000-0001-8250-4074
  - name: Peter Amstutz
    orcid: 0000-0003-3566-7705
date:  August 2022
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Computational workflows are used in data analysis, enabling innovation and 
decision-making in various fields of science. There are several competing workflow description languages, 
WDL (Workflow description Language) and CWL (Common Workflow Languaage) are two examples
of popularly used systems. WDL is a way to specify data processiing workflows with 
a human-readable and writeable syntax. WDL makes it straightforward to define 
complex analysis tasks, chain them together in workflows, and parallelize their execution [@wdl].

> CWL is a way to describe command line tools and connect 

Reviewer: Ditto here, about the `is a way`. I think if descriptions are not identical, and point to different features of each workflow definition language, then this sentence would probably start with something like "On the other hand, CWL is...". 

But take my advice with a pinch of salt, as I studied academic writing but didn't have to use it a lot. You can search for sentence starters, or other academic writing pages that list several examples, e.g.: https://www.op.ac.nz/assets/Uploads/f373ebe246/Sentence-starters.pdf

> the together to create workflows. Because CWL is a specification and not a 

Reviewer: Drop the `the` so s/connect the together/connect together (although "connect" I think implies something is already together?)

> specific piece of software, tools and workflows described using CWL are portable acroos

Reviewer: s/acroos/across

a variety of platforms that support the CWL standard [@cwl].

It can be hard learning and adapting to the various knowledge requirements and

> specifications of a workflow language. This complication makes it hard for analysts and scientists 

Reviewer: Hmmm, "This complication makes it hard" could be re-written too I think… I get the idea here, but I feel like this could be written in some other way. Maybe the whole paragraph could be re-written, with something like

"Groups using WDL or CWL can find it difficult to learn the other workflow definition language if they need to run their workflows in other platforms. It becomes even harder when the workflows contain domain specific knowledge mixed with the definitions, and when analysts and scientists need to consider future collaboration of other groups on the workflows definitions."

Not sure if that'd be better, but I think what you want to show here is the challenge that some groups of users face when they need to translate a workflow written in CWL or WDL into the other language.

share their work and collaborate efficiently with others who are use to working with different language.

> ``wdl2cwl`` is a Python package for converting workflow files written in WDL to workflows in CWL. Python

Reviewer: Maybe drop the "files" and say just "for converting workflows written..."

> allows flexibility and the ability to import other Python packages. 

Reviewer: :+1: but maybe we can drop the part about Python here? Or expand, and say (somehow) that Python allows us to import Python packages that are used to parse CWL and WDL? I think we already talk about that in the rest of the paragraph, so maybe that can be dropped?

> The ``wdl2cwl`` package uses the ``miniwdl`` package [@miniwdl], an open-source, Python package, 

Reviewer: Maybe "uses the `miniwel` package, an open source, developer toolkit and local runner for running WDL workflows, also written in Python"? (I normally write open source without the hyphen, but I see you used it somewhere else here, so whatever you choose, just be consistent I think)

developer toolkit and local runner for running wdl files. The ``wdl2cwl`` package was
designed to provide a class-based and developer-friendly interface for extracting 

> the various sections of a wdl file, dynamically create the various objects

Reviewer: Sometimes we have WDL is upper case, and other times it appears as wdl. We need to be consistent, IMO. Same with wdl file. Maybe WDL workflow, or WDL workflow file, or WDL file. But just repeat the term (it helps readers.)

> needed to create a valid cwl file ( this is done using the ``cwl.utils`` package [@cwl_utils], 

Reviewer: Ditto for cwl and CWL :point_up:

Reviewer: Oh, and `cwl.utils` is the Python package. But the Python module is `cwl-utils`. When I'm talking with other engineers, I think sometimes we use it interchangeably? But in a paper like this one we probably want to use the right term.

You are not wrong that we use the `cwl.utils` package, but I think we must refer to Python modules. You can read more about modules & packages in these two links if you'd like: https://realpython.com/python-modules-packages/ & https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html

an open-source, Python package for parsing cwl files) and performing error checking 

> for valid imports, input declarations, expressions etc.

Reviewer: s/etc./and other useful operations on CWL workflow files, or something like that, maybe?

> ``wdl2cwl`` was designed to be used by both cwl and wdl professionals and researchers, as well

Reviewer: cwl/wdl, and CWL/WDL

> students in courses on bioinformatics and data analytics. It has already been

Reviewer: s/students/as students ? I think

used to convert a number of wdl workflows. This tool makes it easier 

> to translate your favourite WDL workflows into CWL. This could be because of platform 

Reviewer: >your favourite WDL workflows into CWL

I think this would be fine for a presentation or blog, but I feel like I wouldn't see it in a paper (maybe if the author wanted to have a different humor in the paper, but I think normally it would be less formal)

dependency issues (like trying to reproduce a WDL workflow on a platform that only allows CWL),

> or it could be to eliminate the need for an anylyst who undersnd and writes CWL to learn WDL language

Reviewer: s/anylyst/analyst

Reviewer: s/undersnd/understands

> in other to quickly use a WDL workflow or it could be to create a more widely available workflow

Reviewer: s/in other/in order?

> that can be used by users of either languages and so much more.

Reviewer: >and so much more

I think we could be less vague, and list a few ways that the tool could be used, then close it without saying and more (it would be implicit, I think, or we would have listed the general points without having to cover everything that it can do.)
